like many people right now I am in
lockdown in the UK working from home but
as an astrophysicist well the universe
doesn't stop and neither does science
however it has been affected somewhat by
the pandemic so hopefully this video
will shed some light on that so for
those of you who saw my video from six
months ago on the day in the life of an
astrophysicist in my normal office in
the University of Oxford my morning star
here will be very familiar and also seem
rather ordinary because astrophysics is
a lot of data analysis its coding and
running simulations to answer questions
about the universe so all I really need
is my laptop and I can work from
anywhere so this is my home office but
you know to change it up a bit I've been
working from the dining room and from
the lounge and from outside as well but
usually I'm in here and I start with my
bullet journal I write down all the
tasks I want to get done today I check
emails those from colleagues about
science from subscribers with questions
I haven't from the university updating
on the current situation with the
pandemic they've declared a 12 month
hiring freeze for academic jobs which
has never been heard of before it's
really worrying for someone like me I'm
halfway through a three year grant
funded research fellowship and ideally
I'll start applying for a permanent
academic job in the next year or so and
that just might not be any available
I can't think about that now though I've
also got to go through all the new
journal articles that have been released
today and choose one for our groups
journal club later at 10:00 these
articles of the papers we write to
summarize the research we've done to
announce it to the scientific world
every time a science story makes it to
the press it's because an article like
this has been released I like to look at
this one on the potential of galaxy
sized outflows caused by stars and
supernovae to eject gas and stop further
star formation in galaxies it's by one
of my colleagues Guido Roberts Pisani
who has just finished up his PhD at UCL
and move to UCLA before that though I've
got some science to do tomorrow is the
deadline for applications to use the
Meuse instrument on the Very Large
Telescope the VLT in Chile Muse is such
a cool instrument because it's what we
call an AI fu an integral field unit
it's a big bundle of fiber-optic cables
that take a spectrum at each point in
the galaxy so you have a mosaic or a
jigsaw of data across it which you can
also think of as an image of the galaxy
at every color or wavelength now
astronomy are you observing the sky
unlike astrophysics are you doing the
analysis and the science has been
massively affected currently all the
major astronomy observatories are shut
down because of the pandemic including
Mauna Kea in Hawaii USA last Converse
and La Palma
and Paranal and Chile where the VLT is
so anyone who had Muse time in
march/april 2020 have had that time
scrapped so they're all gonna be
applying again for time this year for
2021 just like me making it extra
competitive now a lot of you are
probably thinking surely these
observatories can be operated remotely
but they have billions of dollars worth
of equipment and each one needs
specialist technicians and engineers to
service them during the day and be on
hand in case anything goes wrong during
observing at night so it's just not safe
to keep those sites operating right now
and so they've all been put into a safe
shutdown mode I'm applying for time on
the VLT in March 2021 though so I'm
working with the assumption
that things will be back up and running
by there anything it's gross to put this
proposal together I first of all had to
decide what galaxies I want to observe
work out how long I will need to observe
each one of them with this instrument to
get good quality data and then write a
scientific justification of why it's
important to observe these specific
galaxies I also need to justify why this
telescope specifically is needed to do
this and justify the amount of time I'm
asking for I need the number of nights
I'll need to do it what we're proposing
to observe is 10 of a very rare kind of
galaxies which do not have any bulge in
the middle so why is that rare well when
galaxies form they make these perfect
spiral disk shapes but over time they
merge together and that wrecks that nice
shape and causes stuff to synced in the
middle and form these bulges so instead
of stars on nice ordered orbits in these
disks it's a bit more like a beehive in
the middle of course when you sync
things to the center and a merger like
that the supermassive black hole in the
middle of the galaxy also grows so we
call this coevolution and for a long
time people thought that that's the only
ways that supermassive black holes grow
through mergers but we've got a sample
of galaxies with no bulges with just as
massive supermassive black holes so the
question is how are they growing not
only that but these 10 galaxies also
have supermassive black holes that are
birthing concurrently as well that means
that the galaxy is somehow getting more
than enough material to the center than
the black hole can actually use to grow
and so it actually ends up throwing the
rest out in an outflow ie a burp as I
like to call it and this book doesn't
come from the black hole itself it comes
from relieving the pressure in the
material spiraling around the black hole
before it's crossed the event horizon
now we want to try and resolve these
lips so we can work out how much
material is in them to work out how much
material the galaxy is providing to the
black hole in the middle once we have
that we should be able to narrow down
the mechanism respond
well I eat how the galaxy is growing its
black hole without merging with another
galaxy now it's time for our journal
club so I have my paper that I grabbed
before but Chris has also brought one
along with our PhD student Tobias I went
first with my paper on these galactic
scale outflows so these are burps not
caused by black holes but smaller ones
caused by supernovae and what we do is
we just go over the figures and the
conclusions together and we think about
how that coincides with the big picture
of how galaxies evolve and whether we
should do any follow-up work with our
own data as well you know to check
whether we find the same or follow up on
a question they might have posed in the
paper Tobias went next and he brought a
paper on giant molecular clouds in
barred galaxies so these are huge clouds
which are stellar nurseries from which
stars can form and this paper is saying
that a lot of them are actually found on
the ends of bars which these big
structures we tend to see in spiral and
disk galaxies and then Chris brought a
paper on early type galaxies which are
the end products of these mergers of two
galaxies ones where you end up with no
disk but all bulge so that all the stars
are on these chaotic beehive like orbits
around the center and this paper showed
that actually you can't just assume that
all early type galaxies formed in the
same way like that it looks like they
all have different histories to get to
that point after that we catch each
other up on our individual work and
where we're up to
I sent the final draft of my muse
proposal to them before this and we're
just checking we're happy with
everything but of course there's always
a few final tweaks to make to any draft
so after the call finished I got down to
doing that writing a proposal is a
pretty big task and it's one I feel like
I've been doing for a while now because
last month was also the deadline for
doing the same thing but with the hubble
space telescope so I have to do the
science and technical justifications and
the calculating the time needed you know
all over again because this is a
completely different instrument and it's
in space as well I mean the idea of
Hubble in space looking at my galaxies
that I want to look at is incredible and
I geeked out about it every time I think
but I can't get my hopes up because it's
very competitive obviously I won't be
able to go to the Hubble Space Telescope
because it's its face but if I get time
on Muse I would get to go to the
observatory in Chile which I would love
to do because I haven't had a chance yet
I've been to Mauna Kea and I've been to
La Palma but not yet para now I've been
sat down for a while now so it's
probably time for some exercise I've
been carving out some time before lunch
to do some high-intensity interval
training exercise you know a few days a
week just to help clear my mind a bit
and keep me active I used to commute
into work on the train and now I no
longer walk to and from train stations
have lost about an hour's worth of
movement in my day so it's so important
to keep active usually I want breakfast
as soon as I wake up but I've no
motivation by the end of the day to do
anything so at least working from home
gives me the flexibility to schedule in
some exercise
when I want to do it
[Music]
but I really hope I don't eight to
tomorrow after that tomorrow after a
quick shower and honestly would not have
dried my hair normally if this wasn't
for YouTube but it's lunchtime today's
lunch is ramen I've been finding
thinking of different lunches to make
every day so difficult you know just
missing popping out the nearby delis or
cafes that surround the physics
department in Oxford I found I've really
been missing the ramen from this cool
tiny little food truck that sits up near
the maths Department in Oxford so I
picked up this ramen pack with like
broth and spices included to try and
make something a little bit healthier
than a pot noodle anyway my partner Sam
is also working from home during the
pandemic so we usually eat lunch
together which is really nice to have
that time but if he has a work call over
lunch instead I'll join the PhD students
in the astrophysics department who sell
zoom lunches which is well really good
fun you know for everyone in the
department to catch up socially with
colleagues and just see how everyone's
doing back to work though at one because
I have a call with a colleague in
Lancaster this is Brooks Simmons who I'm
working with on this sample of
borderless galaxies we have a call every
week to catch from what science you've
been up to and also what we've been up
to a lockdown you know just keeping each
other cheerful but today's priority is
once again this Muse proposal because
the deadline is tomorrow did I say that
already could you tell it's on my mind
we're just going over again checking
we're happy with everything in the
justifications and how much time we're
asking for and I'll make more tweaks
later before I submit thankfully we
didn't find anything major that we
wanted to change Brooke also caught me
up with what her PhD students were up to
as well and how she's finding remote
lecturing for undergraduate students
it's definitely not easy and I'm glad
that I'm not a career stage right now
that I have to worry about doing that
too at this point my back is absolutely
killing me from sitting on this chair
it's an okay chair but it's not economic
in the slightest it's like an IKEA
fold-out thing so stretching has become
a daily ritual for me can't hang around
for long though because next up I've got
a call with my master student
Thomas who has been doing a research
project with me all year on how often
mergers happen in groups of galaxies of
different sizes of masses he's currently
in the stage of writing up his research
project and submitting his final thesis
here's my master's thesis that I wrote
back in 2012 as an example this project
usually counts for half of a student's
final year mark but since all exams have
been cancelled by the University and by
all schools across the UK here this will
now be as full mark for the whole year
which there's a scary prospect for a
student added with the fact that he's
probably not going to get back to Oxford
for his final term from May to June you
know to have exams and a big send-off
with all of his mates it's a pretty
heartbreaking time for a lot of students
out there so I'm trying to be as
supportive as I can today we're going
through you know the last little bits of
things because his report is due in a
few weeks he's done all the research now
it's just focusing on the interpretation
you know what things go into the report
things like that so I've got 45 minutes
before I have another call so I'm doing
those last few little tweaks of the
music puzzle that I talked with Brooke
about before then I'm gonna go through
it with a fine-tooth comb to try and
pick up all the typos and grammar issues
that you never want to find one of my
collaborators bill pointed out that I'd
said at one point that none of these
galaxies have been observed in precious
ifu surveys I meant previous but
obviously this beagle Amira sneaked it
out there
[Applause]
I'm at the point where I am happy with
it now but I've just run out of time to
submit it because it's time for a big
team Telecom so most of my PhD research
was done on the shapes of galaxies and
how different shapes of galaxies stopped
forming stars as they run out of fuel to
do this I use the classifications from
the Galaxy Zoo projects an online
citizen science project that gets the
public ie you watching this right now to
classify the shapes of galaxies in
hundreds of thousands of astronomy
Survey images there's just so many of
them that there's not enough
astrophysicists in the world to classify
them or a large enough training set for
computers to do this with machine
learning to a high enough degree of
accuracy this project was the first of
its kind to be set up back in 2007 when
I was even still at school and now
there's hundreds of projects just like
it under the banner of the universe from
classifying penguins in Antarctica to
understand how our fishing is affecting
colony numbers over there to classifying
satellite images taken before and after
natural disasters to help relief teams
on the ground reach those areas that
need it the most
all those classifications get used by
the individual science teams to do
research and so this call is the Galaxy
Zoo science team catching up from the
science people have been up to and the
state of the project since lockdown
we've seen classifications increased to
triple their normal level which I guess
is a silver lining to everything that's
happening right now it means that more
science will get done but now the time
is finally here to submit my muse
proposal after all the checks knowing
everyone is happy with it I love this
moment when a piece of work moves off
your desk and you know that you can
crack on with something else tomorrow
and of course we need the obligatory
happy dance to celebrate that victory of
getting that off my desk and submitting
it you know you've got to take new
victories where you can reached a whole
new level of special there didn't we
Becky honestly I much prefer
the data analysis and coding side of my
job than the writing side so as
important as it is to put together these
proposals that I can get data to work
with I'm looking forward to going back
to some data analysis in the rest of
this week who like this a beautiful
spectrum of a galaxy at least it looks
beautiful to me to celebrate I think
it's definitely time for the daily
lockdown walk to stretch legs outside in
the sunshine I think this really helps
with the mental strain of everything
that's happening in the minute we've
been really lucky in the UK lately to
have some unseasonable warm weather it's
probably made lockdown a lot tougher on
people because you know as soon as the
weather is nice here people are just
programmed to block outside and make the
most of it because we don't see it that
much but I guess this is much nicer than
walking in the rain back home though and
I've obviously got to make sure those
hands are washed properly lizzo is
clearly my song of choice to make sure I
wash them for 30 seconds at this time I
usually do a little bit of editing for
my youtube channel I got to fit it in at
some point during the day so here's a
rare sighting of editing Becky she's
never very happy when she's editing as
you can tell but lucky me Sam has been
making tea whilst I've been editing so
even though it's not a Tuesday we're
having tacos I guess we're making tacit
Wednesday's a thing now just try and
stop us now as much as astrophysics is
my dream job
I can't do it all the live long day my
brain needs a break so we've been doing
a lot of DIY in the evenings and at
weekends we fainted our lounge blew we
cut and stained and hung some shelves
and I even cleaned up an old writing box
of my granddad's DIY is not happening
tonight though because we have got
noughts and crosses to watch on the
iPlayer so I am taking a break and
science will just have to wait for it
all to happen again tomorrow
no no Kagura this will have it my back
is killing me
you